---
layout: entry
sort_order: 45
hierarchy:
 - III: Roman-Period Clay Lamps
 - A: Types from both Western and Eastern Provinces of the Roman Empire
 - b: Augustan and Imperial Lamps
 - "4": Loeschcke type IV
 - b: Bailey type B group ii
cat: [166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207]
cover: 179
---

As Bailey points out, his round-nozzled type B became standardized only in Tiberian times, when Loeschcke shoulder forms III and IV began to be introduced. Out of forty-two Getty lamps of type B group ii, there is one example of shoulder form II a, Claudian to Flavian; one of form II b, Tiberian to early Trajanic; thirty-two examples of form III (III a, III a var., or III b) falling mainly within the second and third quarters of the first century A.D.; seven cases of form IV a, Tiberian to Trajanic and even Hadrianic; and one form VI a, Tiberian to early Trajanic. A base-ring is seen on five lamps associated with shoulder form III. A slightly raised flat base marked off by one circular groove is found on thirty-five lamps. According to Bailey, this base is very common from the Claudian to the Early Trajanic period. Sixteen discus decors are related to mythology; nine to animals; six to amphitheater and circus; four to *symplegma*; five to daily life; the last two are a wreath and a rosette.

Seventeen lamps have a workshop mark on their base: a double *planta pedis* (<span class="inscription">CCLO/CCLO</span>), a second one plain; three marks (an impressed ovolo or a vertical stroke in relief); single letters in relief (<span class="inscription">D, V, C</span>); incuse initials (<span class="inscription">L.M.C., L.M.S.A., M.S</span>) or in relief (<span class="inscription">M.S.V</span>); single names: <span class="inscription">GABINIA, SOTE</span>; *tria nomina* (<span class="inscription">COPPIRES, CCLOSVC, LMVNSVC</span>[?]). It should be remembered that the *tria nomina* on lamps first appear in Late Flavian time.

The base of cat. 166 is decorated with three raised *pelta* motifs in relief, evenly distributed. Such *pelta*-shaped reliefs on the base occur on lamps with ear-lugs of Deneauve type V G: <a href='../../bibliography/#perlzweig-1961'>Perlzweig 1961</a>, p. 79, no. 82, from the Athenian Agora; <a href='../../bibliography/#menzel-1969'>Menzel 1969</a>, nos. 241–42, fig. 19, from <a href='../../map/#loc_599799'>Miletus</a>; <a href='../../bibliography/#miltner-1930'>Miltner 1930</a>, no. 82, pl. 11, from <a href='../../map/#loc_599612'>Ephesus</a>. But they occur also on lamps of other types: <a href='../../bibliography/#menzel-1969'>Menzel 1969</a>, no. 237, fig. 19, from Miletus, Loeschcke type IV; <a href='../../bibliography/#heimerl-2001'>Heimerl 2001</a>, pl. 1.9, Loeschcke type I with a strap handle, and <a href='../../bibliography/#heimerl-2001'>Heimerl 2001</a>, no. 291, pl. 7, Loeschcke type VIII, with an alpha mark on the base, both from <a href='../../map/#loc_550812'>Pergamon</a>; and Bochum Museum, Schüller Collection, cat. no. 275 (Loeschcke VIII) from Anatolia. However, it would be wrong to deduce from these examples that the *pelta* design on a base is characteristic exclusively of the eastern Mediterranean. We find it in <a href='../../map/#loc_413107'>Cosa</a>, Italy (<a href='../../bibliography/#fitch-goldman-1994'>Fitch and Goldman 1994</a>, pp. 187–88, no. CEL 3, a lamp of Deneauve type V G); on an Italian lamp of the same type signed <span class="inscription">OPPI RES</span> (<a href='../../bibliography/#hubinger-1993'>Hübinger 1993</a>, no. 150, pl. 19); on a lamp of oval shape in the Museo delle Terme in Rome (<a href='../../bibliography/#perlzweig-1961'>Perlzweig 1961</a>, ref. under her lamp no. 82); and on an example of Loeschcke type VIII from <a href='../../map/#loc_432873'>Herculaneum</a> (<a href='../../bibliography/#bisi-ingrassia-1977'>Bisi Ingrassia 1977</a>, pl. 48.10b), although nothing proves that this last example had not been imported from an eastern province such as Egypt.

Bailey’s date for his group ii is Tiberian to Early Trajanic. On the basis of the period of activity of the workshops whose signatures appear on some Getty lamps, we have suggested other, mostly later, dates: Late Flavian instead of Tiberian (see cats. 180, 189, 200, 203, 205–6).
