---
layout: entry
sort_order:
hierarchy:
 - III: Roman-Period Clay Lamps
 - A: Types from both Western and Eastern Provinces of the Roman Empire
 - b: Augustan and Imperial Lamps
 - 15: Loeschcke types IX and X (*Firmalampen*)
 - b: Buchi type IX-b = Loeschcke IX-b
cat: [442, 443, 444, 445, 446, 447, 448]
---

In lamps of this type, the discus rim is continuous. All have a handle except cats. 442 and 447. On the beveled nozzle top, between the discus rim and the flat raised nozzle tip, is a rather deep and wide groove. The base is marked off by two rings, the outer one bigger than the inner one, the sole exception being cat. 448, whose base has only one wide raised ring. The seven Getty lamps of type IX-b are all signed, five in capital relief letters, printed upside-down: {{insc:FORTIS}} (twice), {{insc:STROBILI, ATIMETI, EVCARP}}; a sixth one in straight relief letters: {{insc:PVLCHRI}}; the seventh bears an incuse *tria nomina,* {{insc:LMADIEC}}, a workshop active in central Italy that only occasionally made *Firmalampen.* The six first workshops were active in northern Italy in the Flavian period ({{insc:FORTIS}} kilns have been found near {{loc_0000:Modena}}). They specialized in producing *Firmalampen*. However, their products are geographically so widely dispersed and made over such a long time span that they probably developed branches in several provinces or were copied, not to say pirated, on a large scale and at least during the whole second century. The seventh signature, cat. 448, is an incuse *tria nomina,* {{insc:LMADIEC}}, a workshop active in central Italy that only occasionally made *Firmalampen.*
