---
layout: entry
sort_order: 123
hierarchy:
 - III: Roman-Period Clay Lamps
 - B: Types from North African Provinces only
 - b: Augustan and Imperial Lamps
 - 19: Deneauve type X A
cat: [463, 464, 465, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471]

---

This type was long assimilated with Loeschcke type I, until Deneauve in his *Lampes de Carthage* (1969) rightly identified it as a type of its own. It was developed by African potters between A.D. 175 and 250, at a time when Loeschcke type I had not been in production for more than a century. Deneauve type X A keeps the general shape of its predecessor—round discus and triangular volute-nozzle—and yet it has distinct original features. Deneauve has isolated six nozzle forms not found on the first-century models (Deneauve 1969, p. 76, pl. 2). Generally triangular, the volute-nozzle may also have a more or less rounded tip (see Deneauve 1969, nos. 1042, 1043, pl. 94). Distinct forms of shoulder and base have so far not been worked out. Had it not been signed by {{insc:PVLLAENVS}}, the well-known African workshop active A.D. 175–250, a lamp of this type in a private collection (see Bussière 1998) would certainly have been dated to the Julio-Claudian period by many specialists, on the basis of its shape alone. This rare document shows one of the first attempts of the African workshop to revive faithfully a completely abandoned form. This was probably done from reuse of old molds, or through the technique of surmoulage, and by progressively adding to the form new original features more in the taste of the time. Among these, for example, is the treatment of the volutes. On cat. 463 they are quite similar to the volutes on Loeschcke type I, but the way they are connected by a ridge underneath the nozzle is something new. On cats. 463 and 465 the volutes are separated by a relief decor on the nozzle top; underneath the nozzle they are linked to each other by a raised fleur-de-lis motif. On cat. 471 they are merely sketched out and marked off by two grooves.

The discus decors are also original and do not figure in the iconographic repertories of former types. They deal with harbor scenes, Alexandrian landscapes, still-lifes, hunting scenes, actors, athletes, and mythological representations, all treated in a new style.

Of the nine Getty examples, four have a signature: {{insc:VICTORINI, POSSESSORVM, PORCI}}, and one that is illegible. Among other African workshops that produced Deneauve type X A lamps, one finds {{insc:PVLLAENI, AVGENDI, LVCCEI, MAVRICI, REVOCATI, VENVSII, CARPAMI}}, and {{insc:CRETASSI}}. These ateliers, located in {{loc_0000:Africa Proconsularis}}, have also produced and exported lamps to other African provinces, to Italy, the Italian islands, and to Spain. Late examples of such lamps have a rounded or heart-shaped nozzle of type Deneauve VIII B. The date of Deneauve type X A—A.D. 175–250—is supported by the presence of several signatures of those workshops also found in {{loc_0000:Carthage}} on clay figurines (Deneauve 1987, pp. 197–230). These show female figures with the fashionable hairstyle of Julia Domna, which provides a chronological clue. One of these figurines, representing an hydraulic organ with its player (Deneauve 1987, fig. 17, Mu 1), bears the signature {{insc:POSSESSORIS}}, incised in a characteristic handwriting that is found also on a lamp of Deneauve type X A in the British Museum (Bailey BM III, Q 1718, pl. 15); on one from {{loc_0000:Bu Njem}} (Deneauve 1986, p. 145, figs. 2–5): ({{insc:GRATIANI}}\[?\]); on one from {{loc_0000:Sabratha}} (Joly 1974, no. 1318, pl. 57); and on cat. 463 ({{insc:POSSESSORVM}}). The same writing was used also by {{insc:MAVRICIVS}}, as testified by two lamps from {{loc_0000:Pupput}} (Bonifay 2004a, p. 336, nos. 11 and 12, fig. 189); and by {{insc:CARPAMI, AVGENDI}}, and {{insc:REVOCATI}} (see Guarducci 1982, p. 131, fig. 1).

There are a few other archaeological criteria to date the type. Bu Njem (ancient Gholaia), a Roman camp in Libya occupied between A.D. 201 and 259/263, has yielded five lamps of the type under discussion (Rebuffat 1987, pp. 86–87). Another example has been found in a tomb of Pupput dated by its context to the middle or second half of the third century (Bonifay 2004a, p. 336, fig. 189.6, already quoted above for its handwriting). Finally, {{loc_0000:Chemtou}} (Tunisia), where the workshop was active between A.D. 175 and 280, has yielded 209 examples of the type (Vegas 1994, p. 175).

Deneauve type X A lamps with harbor scenes have been much discussed: Is the harbor represented Alexandria, Ostia, or Carthage? Ultimately, Bailey favors Carthage (BM III, p. 431). In several articles—the most important being Joly 1968, Bernhard 1972, Bailey 1984, Carretero Vaquero 1991, and Amaré Tafalla and Liz Guiral 1994—one can find more parallels than the ones given for the similar lamps cats. 464–67. These four lamps have been registered in the Getty Museum as fakes. After careful examination, we think they are authentic. Because parallels of these lamps given by several authors have systematically been considered forgeries produced by a modern workshop in Naples, we will develop our arguments.
