---
layout: entry
sort_order: 124
hierarchy:
 - III: Roman-Period Clay Lamps
 - B: Types from North African Provinces only
 - b: Augustan and Imperial Lamps
 - Authenticity of cats: 464–65, discussion
cat: [464, 465, 466, 467]
---

The shape, workmanship, and looks and color of clay and slip of the first two lamps, cats. 464–65, are in accordance with some identical known parallels: see Deneauve 1969, no. 1047, pl. 95; or Hellmann 1985, no. 14, for cat. 464; Deneauve 1969, no. 1044, pl. 95, for cat. 465, signed <span class="inscription">PORCI</span> by an African workshop. The only slight difference between Deneauve no. 1044 and our cat. 465 is the design on their nozzle tops: a stepped structure (lighthouse[?]) on the former, a small boat on the latter. This last design appears also on the nozzle top of a lamp from {{loc_314921:Carthage}} of the same African type, signed <span class="inscription">PVLLAENI, IANVARI</span> (Alaoui I, no. 233). As further evidence of their authenticity, cats. 464–65 have remains of corrosion from an iron wick-nail. In the case of cat. 465, the half-preserved needle, integrated into the clay, is unmistakably ancient.

The general form of cat. 466 as well as the shape of its rilled shoulder and of its base undoubtedly belong to Deneauve type X A, but the blunt squarish shape of its nozzle does not. At least we do not know of any such nozzle form on lamps of Deneauve type X A. Except for its peculiar nozzle, the lamp has several parallels in the literature, for example, Deneauve 1969, no. 1046, signed {{insc PVLLAENI}} just like cat. 466. Puzzling detail: on the discus of the Carthage lamp the fisherman in the boat is holding a fishing rod, which is not represented on cat. 466. Would the same workshop (<span class="inscription">PVLLAENI</span>) represent practically the same scene both with and without a relatively important detail, or can this omission be due to a defect in the molding process? On some unsigned lamps showing the same fishing scene done in excellent relief—for instance, Mlasowski 1993, no. 289—we see both the rod and the fisherman unhooking the fish caught to his line. On the other hand, the discus of a fragmented lamp of Deneauve type X A (Vegas 1994, no. 498, pl. 124a) bears the same decor without the fishing rod, as on cat. 466. The authenticity of this lamp is ascertained, for it was found in situ in the camp of {{loc_315174:Simitthus}}. Unfortunately its base is missing, so we do not know whether or not the lamp was signed <span class="inscription">PVLLAENI</span>.

Do the peculiar shape of the nozzle, the omission of the fishing rod, and the perhaps too conspicuous burn marks around the wick-hole of cat. 466 suggest a forgery? The lamp was registered in the Getty Museum as a fake. An inspection under ultraviolet light conducted by Eduardo Sánchez of the Museum’s Antiquities Conservation Department has proved that the nozzle has been restored: the joint lines on the nozzle are visible with some dark brown resinous material in them, which may be paint. Mortar or clay has been used to mask the joints. Is the nozzle the original one, or has it been borrowed from another broken lamp? Only a comparative analysis of both clays, from the basin and the nozzle, performed in a specialized laboratory, could give the answer. Ultimately, our present conviction is that the lamp, despite its suspicious nozzle, is authentic.

One merit of BM III is its classification into organized groups of 165 false lamps in the British Museum, giving, as always, an abundance of parallels. According to BM III, our cat. 467 should be classified in the Naples group of forgeries produced between 1870 and World War II (Bailey BM III, pp. 429–38), more precisely in group 6 of this modern workshop (Bailey 1984, pp. 268–69). This group gathers five lamps showing a fishing scene; group 7 contains five lamps showing a causeway. While admitting that he has seen only three of these ten lamps and that “it is perhaps hazardous to condemn the other seven from photographs alone,” Bailey nevertheless has no doubt whatsoever that the three examples he has actually seen are modern products stemming from an Italian factory, probably in Naples, that manufactured fake lamps as tourist souvenirs. In the course of twenty-five years’ museum work, he adds, he has seen “hundreds of examples of the products of this factory in many museums; these products are readily recognizable by shape, appearance, fabric and surface treatments” (Bailey 1984, p. 269).

Without casting any doubt on Bailey’s exceptional professional experience, we feel that he has not given sufficient reasons to declare as forgeries the five lamps of his group 6 to which cat. 467 belongs, four of which he has not seen. (Elsewhere, in BM III [p. 429], about the thirty-eight lamps of different types included in the Naples group, Bailey specifies: “The fabric is usually of a brownish color, but is occasionally cream-coloured or pale buff, and is normally covered with a dark brown paint, with painted blackening round the wick-holes; very often there is an applied incrustation of rust-coloured particles.” None of these observations applies to cat. 467, nor do the following comments on fakes, made by Haken describing a lamp in the Prague museum (an exact replica of cat. 467) (Haken 1958, pp. 106–8, no. 113, pl. 16): “The lamp is molded of light yellow material. Its surface is light grey. . . . The light weight and the exceptionally well preserved decoration leads immediately to the suspicion that a copy or a falsificate is present here. Noteworthy is also the covering of the surface by a grey color and the application of small grains of rusty color to the decorated surface.”

The Prague lamp is undoubtedly a fake. It probably has influenced Joly (1968) to consider as fakes similar lamps gathered in her group I B, and likewise Bailey (1984) when he discusses the four lamps in his group 6 of which, as already noticed, he has seen only one (lamp V, from the Fitzwilliam Museum). Carretero Vaquero (1991) and Amaré Tafalla and Liz Guiral (1994) take for granted the same assessment of forgery. Speaking of his lamps nos. 24–28 (p. 202), Carretero Vaquero (1991) writes: “Son falsificaciones napolitanas del siglo XIX, próntamente reconocibles tanto por su forma como por su acabado” (They are Neapolitan fakes from the nineteenth century, immediately recognizable both by their shape and by their finish). Those two statements are unjustified. There is nothing in the shape alone that authorizes us to consider as a fake cat. 467, which has replicas in Deneauve’s authentic lamps nos. 1042–43 signed <span class="inscription">PVLLAENI</span>. The *acabado* (finish) of Carreto’s fake lamps nos. 24–28 cannot be a criterion for identifying a forgery, for we have observed the same finish on genuine lamps of Deneauve type X A, such as the Kestner Museum sample (Mlasowsky 1993, p. 279, no. 289). Here again we suspect an author of being *a posteriori* influenced by Haken’s remarks made for his fake lamp no. 113 (Haken 1958, p. 106).

In conclusion, we have no reason whatsoever to suspect the authenticity of cat. 467. The Prague fake lamp no. 113 must have been inspired by a genuine lamp that has to be sought in Africa exclusively, given that its shape is absent in other Roman provinces.
