---
layout: entry
sort_order: 34
hierarchy:
 - III: Roman-Period Clay Lamps
 - A: Types from both Western and Eastern Provinces of the Roman Empire
 - b: Augustan and Imperial Lamps
 - 1: Loeschcke type I
 - 1.1: Loeschcke type I A = Bailey type A group i
cat: [76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84]
---

The primary characteristic of Loeschcke type I A is a shallow V-shaped channel between the discus and the nozzle. Further characteristic is a narrow shoulder, usually level, that slopes slightly inward with closely set concentric rills. In other respects the shoulders belong to Loeschcke shoulder forms I and II. Most Getty lamps of this group lack a handle and have a base-ring. The exception is cat. 82, which has a handle and a flat circular base marked off by one circular groove. Both these features point to a slightly later date than the general chronology of the type. Cat. 81 likewise has a handle but keeps a base-ring; yet the presence of the handle and the blurred aspect of the lamp due to a very worn mold produced by surmoulage (overmolding) likewise suggest a slightly later date, like cat. 82. Cat. 83 with its V-shaped channel belongs to Loeschcke type I A, but it has an unusual shoulder marked off by two grooves and decorated with a row of ovolos. A nearly similar shoulder with ovolos is found on cat. 84, classified within Loeschcke type I A despite its lack of a channel. Cat. 76 has a small lug handle on each side; it is very close to Bailey BM II, Q 755, pl. 1, of Loeschcke type I A, with a similar club in the middle of its V-shaped channel. Bailey dates his type A group i to the Augustan-Tiberian period.
